to probably read my watch better if it were turned
correctly.
First, I would like for you to explain to me how you
developed your interest in oceanography.
I developed my interest in oceanography when I was
a graduate student at MIT.
working across the hall one day from a lecture room
where Bill Van Arks was giving a lecture. And I
overheard him in the class. I overheard what he was
talking about in the class. And when the class was
over, I went up to him and I said, what he was talking
about sounded very interesting. And did he mind if
I sat in on his course? I was too late to register,
but I'd just like to sit in on it. He said, sure, he'd
be delighted to have me sit in on his course. So I sat
in on his course. And
that summer he arranged for me to come to the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution as a summer
student fellow, which I did. And I got interested
in what I was doing, and I'm still here. And here you
are. Yeah. That was 19 years ago. What pursuit were
you following at MIT? I was in geophysics, but I
thought I was interested in terrestrial
magnetism. And I was working on a geochronology
project dating the age of the Earth. wasn't
finding that as interesting as it ought to be. The
man I came to work with thought he had a serious
cancer and was going to die. Happily, he's still
alive and kicking. But I came all the way here to MIT
to be his graduate student. He thought he was dying
of cancer and so handed all his students over to
somebody else. So I was kind of homeless anyway.
And I didn't find the geochronology project, that
geochronology project, as interesting as I
thought it should have been. Von Arx's class
sounded very interesting. I haven't regretted
it. With whom did you work when you came here to
Woods Hole? With Bill Fennarks. And what was your
first project? The first project was one I got
involved with that summer. I
came here, and Bill Fennarks had forgotten about
me. He had organized that I should come for the
summer, then he forgot about me. And he went to sea a
couple days before I arrived. He went to sea for a
month. And he came back at the end of the month and
said, oh, you, I forgot. And I spent the next three
or four years working on the data from that cruise I
didn't get to go on, which was kind of dumb all
around when you think about it. But that was my
thesis. And I worked after, but I got my degree in
the same field for a couple more years. And I
switched a bit. I felt like I plumbed all I could of
that for a while. And I changed other things. Okay.
First, what were you working on? Oh, what was I
working on? Okay, fine. I was working on the effect
of meanders in the Gulf Stream off the coast of the
Carolinas and trying to understand what their
properties were and what their dynamic effect
was. And I was able to show that they had a role in
transferring They had a major role, I think, in
transferring energy
from the density field of the ocean into the Gulf
Stream. And I worked on that for a number of years,
wrote a number of papers on it. They're in the
literature.
In the early 60s, I became more intrigued. In fact,
in the course of some of my Gulf Stream work, I put
out deep-sea moorings with instruments that
recorded, and then you go back after a few months
and cover the instruments. In fact, I think I may
have been the first person ever to write a paper on
doing that kind of thing, at least the way we do it
now. And using the data, there were lots of papers
saying what we should do and what we will do, but
nobody really went out and got the data and
analyzed the data. And I think I was the first
person did do that of this kind. And I got more
interested, and I thought that it was clear that in
the future there would be a big effort in doing
this. And so I devoted a number of years to trying to
build up a group to put out deep sea moorings and
collect data with them from independent
instruments. And that project's going right now.
It's the largest project in this institution.
It's been going for, well, I got involved in about
62. And it's been going since then. I was one of the
people who really made it. I
got out of it four or five years ago when I got into
more administrative tasks. I still keep my hand in
on it, but I don't work on it scientifically in the
sense of publishing papers. Did you ever teach
here at Woods Hole? No. Oh, let's see. I've got to be
careful to answer that one. Yes, I taught. I taught
at MIT. It was a while in the late 60s before Woods
Hole started its educational program, where we
had an arrangement whereby people on the staff
here were given appointments on the staff at MIT.
So I was given an appointment at MIT in the
Department of Earth, and I was called in. Today
it's called Earth and Planetary Sciences. Then it
was called Earth Sciences, I think. And I was given
an appointment as an assistant professor in the
Earth Sciences Department. I taught there in
1964,
perhaps. I can't remember the year now. And then I
taught again the second time in 67. In 67, I gave
classes here, but it was still an MIT course. After
that, I didn't. That was shortly about that time
Woods Hole developed its own program, and those
joint appointments were abolished. But there
were four or five of us here in the staff who had
joint appointments with MIT. Did you always feel
as if your career was aimed towards research
rather than teaching? Yes.
Do you think that the primary purpose of an
institution like, let's say, Scripps and Woods
Hole, which in this case are unique, are primarily
designed for research and teaching, and is that a
good thing for oceanography? I'm not quite sure I
understand your question. Are they primarily
designed for research? They are primarily
designed for research. Yes. Oh, OK. And do you
think that's essentially a good thing for
oceanography? Do you think this is the sort of role
that large institutions should have? As opposed
to? As opposed to being both teaching and research
institutions. Oh, no. We are a teaching and
research institution here. And teaching is an
integral part. We have 80 graduate students going
for their PhD here. This is the largest, maybe the
largest collection of people going for their PhD
in oceanography in the world right here. So we
can't. We're heavily involved with teaching. But
that's a fairly late development. It's late in
terms of my own career. I got involved about the
time that our teaching program really got off the
ground here. I began to get involved with other
things. I went away for a year's sabbatical about
that time. I was involved in the early days. I was a
member of the first committee that was organized
to develop the joint program we have right now with
MIT. And that was after I'd been a teacher. Yeah,
I'm not being very articulate about this, which is
unfortunate. But it seems almost as if Woods Hole
itself is, in effect, a latecomer to the teaching
of oceanography. In a formal sense, that's quite
true. But remember, I got my PhD years before we had
a program here, and I was a student at MIT, and the
doors were open here, and I came and did my thesis. I
think if you look back at the people who first
started here, you'll find people way back in the
early 30s who were, say, students at Harvard or
whatever, and got their theses at Harvard or
wherever as a result of research work done here. It
wasn't until 10 years ago that this institution
got the authority to put its own name on a
sheepskin. And since that time, our program has
grown a great deal. And it's a good program. All
right. And I take it then from the quality of your
answers that you're excited about the idea of
bringing students into .. It's essential.
There's no question about it. You can't. We
couldn't. It's just a question of the maturity of
this particular institution and perhaps a little
bit of the field. But no, we would be a much more
sterile place if we didn't have that. No question.
Now, as you begin to design the institution to
bring in formal students here, rather than a
working relationship with MIT, what was your
reaction to faculty? What was your reaction? How
did you design it? What did you think about when you
began to think about bringing in formal students?
What sort of students did you want? What did you
want them to do? In other words, describe for me the
sort of thought processes that seem to go through
here. I don't think there was much I don't think
there was much of a problem along the lines you're
suggesting, because we kind of slid into it. We had
this program going already with MIT. We had had
students for years around the institution, not
just from MIT, but from other labs, other
universities as well. And so when the time came to
make the formal thing, and we signed an agreement
with MIT, a formal education in oceanography so
that all students in both institutions would be
jointly registered, We just took the status quo,
and there were already up at MIT several dozen
students. They automatically became joint
students if they wanted to. There was a
grandfather clause. Any student who didn't want
to become a Woods Hole student was MIT alone. And
about half the students decided they wanted to
jointly, and about half decided they didn't. But
after that point, they were all admitted jointly.
We had a well-entrenched faculty. We had a
well-qualified faculty here. We don't use the
word faculty, we say staff. We had a
well-qualified staff here. We didn't have any
trouble finding people to serve on admissions
committees, to serve on thesis committees. We
walked right into it. A good number of the younger
men in the institution, though not the older ones,
had taught elsewhere, and so they knew what they
wanted to do. The old-timers had been here since
the 30s, and they had a different outlook on
things, but the younger ones, they thought
teaching was a routine part of life. We went into a
fairly... There were some pains, but they were the
kind of administrative pains involved with
everything. And I think looking back at it, what we
did was inevitable, and it's hard to imagine that
we wouldn't have students now. We would have a very
bad problem right now if we didn't. People would
really rise up and say, we've got to get a program if
we didn't have one today.
I don't think we had any problems with curriculum
because we had worked that out. We had a de facto
curriculum before we had students. We had a de
facto faculty. I mean, taking a place like this
with the majority of whom wouldn't have any
trouble getting a job at a university and adding
students to them, you don't have any of the
problems you might have in trying to create a
university from scratch. Didn't have any
problems in trying to decide who was a member of the
faculty or what these things were. We still don't
have much problem because we have so few students
relative to the large size of the research staff
here. that the ratio is a good one. It's in favor of
the students. There's two or three staff members
for students still. And the students get lots of
attention. And there's no teaching load
problems. Those who teach do. Those who don't want
to, there's no heat on them. So it works out easily.
So there was not any internal problems or external
problems in making a transition? Oh no, there were
internal problems. There were strains. There
were a lot of people who said, I came to Woods Hole
because it wasn't a teaching institution and I
don't want to teach. And those people, some of
those people never have taught, never will, and
there's no heat on them too. A few other people who
said that, when the students got here, they
realized they were missing a good thing, and some
of them are staunch members of the teaching thing
right now. But as I say, because we have such a large
staff and such a large number of students,
particularly a small number of students,
particularly at the beginning, we didn't have any
problem in meeting our requirements to handle the
students.
In terms of placing students, have you had any
problem? No. Every student we've ever turned
out's got a job. And
I don't think all our students have the job they It
would be wrong to say all our students got the first
job they wanted if they were able to write a
prescription. They might say, we all want to be a
professor at Harvard, and maybe only one or two are
professors at Harvard. On the other hand, I don't
think there are any. We haven't had a problem of
producing more students than we can get jobs for.
Everyone has had a job, and all of them have been
pretty good jobs. They've all been in the field one
way or another. If you were going to offer
recommendations to an undergraduate student who
wanted to do graduate work at Woods Hole, how would
you tell him to organize his academic studies? I
would say, well, it would depend on the field he was
in. We're covering all the various disciplines of
oceanography. Here we call it biology,
biological oceanography, chemical
oceanography, marine geology and geophysics,
physical oceanography and ocean engineering.
Each one of those. disciplines has a different
curriculum which would lead into it. Physical
oceanography is my specialty. And physical
oceanography, I would say, don't muck around with
any oceanography courses in undergraduate.
Study mathematics, study physics, get a good
grounding in the basics. Come here with a good
grounding in the basics, and you can do anything
you want. OK. And so I infer from that that you think
that probably schools which give general
undergraduate oceanography degrees don't do the
sort of work to produce the kind of graduate
student who would come here for the scripts.
That's generally correct. I don't know about
scripts. I can't speak for that. But I know from our
curriculum we've had very few people come here
who've, if any, ever, I don't know, can't think of
one offhand, but we may have, that have come with an
undergraduate degree in oceanography. And even
the people who've taken option courses, whatever
you call them, in oceanography, it hasn't done
them much good because really the Proper
oceanography is a pretty rigorous field, and you
need to have the basics to make much progress in it.
The best students we get are, let's say, in
physical oceanography, some of the best students
have been applied mathematicians of various
mathematical types, physical types, chemistry
types. No ocean bias at all in terms of their
undergraduate curriculum. I feel quite strongly
that that's the best way to do it. Otherwise, you
just dilute yourself in obtaining the
intellectual tools you have to have. Are your
students nationally, in terms of margin? Yes.
International. International, in terms of
margin.
Do you foresee or would you predict more
international students coming into Scripps now
that, for example? You mean Woods Hall? I'm sorry.
At Woods Hole, I was comparing you to Scripps
mentally as I went through here. Well, since I said
Scripps, it's OK. It seems to me that at Scripps
that now people are talking about 250-mile
research lines, international law, and so forth,
that there's almost a deliberate attempt to
create more international cooperation and to
attract more students. Yes, that's right. And do
you think the same thing is happening here at Woods
Hole? There will be more effort to do that, but
there's also a feeling here that we won't
compromise our standards on quality, and that we
may try and set up some kinds of special programs,
not related to, but not part of our normal
degree-granting program to accommodate foreign
students. Yes, it's going to be necessary to do
that. In some cases, in countries we want to work in
collaboration with, we're going to have to, as
kind of a quid pro quo, accommodate their
students. And we recognize that, and the staff
here is working on it. As both an administrator and
as a practicing oceanographer, do you feel uneasy
about the changes in international law? Do you
feel it's going to limit your chances to do your
science? No, there's no question it's going to
limit our chances to do science, and naturally I'm
uneasy about it. It's a reflection of the
international situation in the world today. The
United States is one of the half countries, and we
like to be able to do things our way, and there's a
number of A lot of countries out there in the world,
the majority of them I think is honest, more than
the majority, are determined that we shall not be
the king of the cock of the walk, king of the roost,
whatever. And it's going to hurt oceanography a
great deal. It's going to limit us tremendously.
It's going to make work more expensive. It's going
to make it impossible in some cases. It's going to
make it aggravating, irritating, frustrating,
whatever. And there's no question it's going to
have a very serious negative effect on our freedom
to do things. It hasn't hit us yet, but it will. Do
you foresee, then, more, let's say, cooperative
projects between yourself and, let's say, Chile?
Certainly, yeah. We have that now, and that kind of
thing will work. We have cooperative progress
with Chile. We have cooperative projects
underway right now in this institution with
several countries around the world. And this will
continue. I could name 20 countries I think we're
working collaboratively with. That will just
have to increase. How do you make contact with
those countries? The most effective normal way is
to work with scientists in those other countries.
If you write to the Foreign Office of Zambia,
you're not even going to get an answer to your
letter. If you write to Professor so-and-so at
some university in Zambia whom you happen to have
met at a meeting somewhere, you may get
overwhelmed by hospitality, and you'll get not
only a permission, but you may even get
assistance. This has happened to us. Some of our
scientists have really done a nice job. for
example, in Indonesia or maybe Zambia, many of
these countries where we've been able to do
things. Woods Hole should have a tremendous
advantage with the size of your fleet in making
contacts there. Well, it's an advantage and a
disadvantage. We have a large fleet, but, of
course, that multiplies the number of times we
make contacts with the people, so it makes it work
even harder to keep abreast of the law of the sea
problems.
Why did you choose to become an administrator?
The opportunity was there, first of all, partly
because I found I was skilled at it. I became the
chairman of the physical oceanography
department a few years back, and that seemed to be,
at the time, a natural thing to do. And in so doing, I
was able to keep on with research and
administration both, because the job was not too
much of a chore. Then the opportunity came along to
become the associate director of the
institution. That was more of a hard decision, but
I thought I can always back off, and it may be worth a
try. I'll try it for a while and see whether I like it
or not. So I did. And do you like it? Not every day.
Who does? This is maybe one of those days. The
question is, those days, yeah, there has to be some
fun in them. There is some fun. It's nice to be able
to be... has to be able to influence things your
way. It's nice to be able to work with a lab where you
respect the people and their abilities. That's
some reward. It's nice to be able to do that. On the
other hand, there are times when those very things
are things that drive you up the wall. It depends
when you catch me. What sort of new ideas did you try
to bring in as associate director?
That's a hard question, because I don't know that
I'm not sure I brought in this. I'm not sure that I
have consciously been bringing in new ideas.
Maybe that's a bad thing to say, but I can't say
that. I think that one of the things I felt most
strongly that was my task to try and do was trying to
make the institution more open in its
relationship to the staff, the faculty, and try
and make it a more effective place for them to do
their work. I think with a relatively small
institution, the institution is both big and
small, depending on which way you're looking at
it. Compared to a university, it's small.
Compared to oceanographic labs, it's big. But in
the small sense of it, you'd like to have it as most
flexibility there is for the scientists in the
institution. And you'd like to... You can't tell
them what to do, really, because they know more
about what the science is than I do. I can only be in a
position, from my experience, to try and set
things up so it's more easy for them to do things.
And a few times I've been successful at that, and a
few times I'm sure people around here would say
that I was part of the problem, not part of the
solution. It's hard. You have to do what you think
is right, and a few times I've had to be negative to
people for reasons that I thought were justified.
that we've had growing pains in this institution
as it's gotten bigger and it's getting more
impersonal naturally and i felt one of the most
important things i could do was trying to make the
system more responsive to the peculiar needs of
any any assigned individual involved with
science you have to be able to maintain that
flexibility that you had when you were small
that's hard what about faculty relationships or
staff relationships uh as it's as it's grown as the
number of your staff members has increased.
Clearly, the sort of exchange among them will
decrease. I think that's true of any academic
institution. The exchange per person? Per
person, yes, in terms of the total. Yeah, OK. Is
there any way you've tried to correct that? Does it
seem correctable? Or do you think this is just sort
of the nature of a modern academic institution?
I'm not sure that.
Interactions between scientists, oh, we've done
some things, I've done some things to try and
increase that. I haven't made a very strong effort
on it. I'm not really sure we've got yet to the size
where that's really that serious a problem. We
have a tendency, there's a kind of a tribal
tendency in the institution for people to work
only within their own department, and actually
the department's typically have, let's say, 25
faculty members, and that's probably small
enough for them to talk to each other within as
much. The bigger problem comes between
departments, and sometimes I've been helpful in
getting people together between departments. So
I haven't had a conscious banner-waving crusade
to try and get people to talk together more. The
institution itself has taken steps to try and get
this through more kinds of committees and
meetings and things to try and encourage people to
talk. When it all comes down to it, there's a limit
to how much of that you can do and get your work done.
You've got to go back to your office or your lab and
do your own work a fair amount of the time. You can't
spend all your time communicating. But you've got
to communicate enough so there's no
misunderstandings and so people don't work
across purposes. And that's really perhaps where
I sit above the department chairman. I have a
chance to see when those opportunities are there
to try and keep people from doing things across
purposes or when they know what things should be
going on. Ship time. Is there any problem?
The ships are a serious problem, because it's a big
part of our work here. We've got three large ships
and a submarine, and trying to decide on
priorities of who gets the ship when are a problem.
Trying to fund them is a problem. They run several
million dollars a year, which it hasn't been
always obvious every year that we find enough
money to make the books balance. But we haven't
gone bankrupt, so we have, but it's required a lot
of attention. also hard deciding how to decide
what you want to do if three people want to go and
work in the Pacific and three people want to go and
work in the Atlantic and you only have one
uncommitted ship at that point how do you decide
which group which group of people are going to make
up the crews these are things that I've been
involved with all right that anticipates really
the questions I want to ask in two parts first part
is how do you make a decision on who takes the ship or
doesn't take the ship So we've tried to do it as much
as we could by trying to develop overall lines of
priority and saying, okay, this year we have X ship
days and we have a long-term commitment to a
certain program, which means this ship has to stay
in the North Atlantic. We have another long-term
commitment of some kind, which means another ship
has to be in the Mediterranean. We've got a third
ship free and we've got commitments that's – we've
got – desire to be in the Pacific and the Indian
Ocean, let's say. We'll try and see if we have more
people want to go to one than the other, so the one
with the least number of people can be put off
another year and try and build up a little more
strength, as an example. These are all kind of
common sense things. And then we have a
head-to-head conflict. We'd have to resolve it by
trying to look at it from an institution point of
view and based on its scientific merit. And that's
difficult because you can't say biology is better
than physical oceanography necessarily. But you
do it. Usually there's some other factors that you
throw into the balance that make the difference.
And we usually, final decisions like this are
decided in this institution by what we call staff
council of the various department chairmen and
the directors getting together and deciding,
okay, we've got a head-to-head problem here. We
only have one ship and two people who want it, and
therefore it'll go to so-and-so. Our SIP
schedules are made typically 18 months ahead of
time, so there's usually a lot of time for If we make
a bad decision, there's a lot of time for people to
protest and get things straightened out. And
until the day the ship sails, usually we're never
exactly sure of the ship's schedule. But you can
see on the wall there our schedules for 77, 78.
We'll start in right now on 79. And then, oh, in a
couple of months, I'll sound a memo to people
saying, we'd like to have a written input from you
on what your major is. requirements are for ships
in 1979. We'll only have one great big bash of a
meeting in a meeting room, and everybody will
stand up and say, well, I want to use that ship for
eight weeks here, and somebody else says, I want to
use it for 12 weeks here, and so forth. We'll put
them all together. If it solves, if we put them all
end to end, and we've got four ships or whatever,
and they all solve, fine. Our experience has been
we usually got one and a half times as many requests
as we have ship days. Then we have a problem. We know
from experience that we don't get enough money
from the funding agencies in Washington to
support one and a half times as many ship days. We
know the problem is going to be self-regulating.
The question is where is that we're likely... Can
we anticipate which programs would like to fall
out because they're not yet well enough to find,
which is usually the case, why things fall out. Not
because they're bad, but people haven't got their
ducks in order yet and their program doesn't quite
work. And... We cast out the programs we think are
weak if we can identify them. By hook or by crook, we
usually get it down. It's not a process which
can... It's not a linear process, the one that we
can say, well, here's a formula for how we do it,
because it interacts with the scientists, groups
of scientists, with the funding agencies, and
with our hardware, with the ships themselves. We
don't want to send... Because of the crew morale,
we've got a ship right now which is in the... Let's
see. We just got one. I'm sorry. We got one back just
a few months ago from the Indian Ocean. It had been
away 22 months. We're not going to send it again on
another 22-month cruise for quite a while. It's
not fair to the crew members. So that ship is ruled
out for going on the next large cruise. Our next
large cruise is going to be in 1978 when we send that
ship into the Pacific. It'll be off a different
ship than we sent to the Indian Ocean simply
because of the morale of the crew. We just can't do
that to them. We've got all kinds of constraints.
There's so many constraints that go on and on. I'm
not sure it's very interesting. Just use common
sense to solve it. You have to go through one by one
all these problems. Do you feel that all your
students should go to C? I think our students
mostly all do go to C. It depends on the student. We
have a few students who are working on problems
which involves a computer, for example, doing
numerical modeling or something. They can do
perfectly well if they never go to sea, although
even in those cases, we generally encourage them
to go to sea. I don't think we've turned out
students recently who haven't been at least once
to see what it's like. Some people go to sea, and
they just go for months and months, and they're
chief scientists and run things and everything
else. That's the other extreme. I don't know why
you picked on students. Why didn't you say, should
our staff go to sea? Because I was thinking in terms
of the planning program. I assume most of your
staff at one time or another has been to sea. Oh, no.
We've got staff here who have never been to sea in
their life. They've been here their whole career
here. And the day they retire, they'll never have
been to sea. Stonewall was telling me that he
wished he had gone to sea more, but his work had
never really let him do so. Yeah. Yeah. He doesn't.
Well, he goes to sea a fair amount compared with
some. There are people in this lab who have never
been to sea in their life, and they're good,
productive oceanographers. Good. They're
working in a laboratory studying specimens
somebody else brings back, or they're working in
an office with a computer and a slide rule doing
theoretical studies or something like that, or
studying something that doesn't require them to
go to sea. For some, doing modeling, they don't
have to go to sea. They haven't. And there are few,
but there are some. I think the students are the
same as everybody else. There's a cross-section
of them. Although you might argue that part of the
educational process would be at least one trip to
sea to find out what they're talking about.
There's been some complaint among older
oceanographers that younger oceanographers
don't go to sea often enough, don't get their feet
wet, is usually what they say. Yeah, I heard it. I
agree that they say that. It's the old Iron Man,
Wooden Chip Syndrome. Oceanography's going
through a hero phase back in the early days, and the
old-timers still feel it. I'm not sure it's
necessary to be a hero to be a good scientist.